[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today, we're
going to be talking about an extension of
polynomials on sequences where we move to rational
polynomial sequences. This will also give us an
opportunity to introduce, in a very gentle
way, the idea of a limit rather informally
and in a very simple example. We'll also be
introducing some important new terminology and an
extension of our number field to include
infinity, which might be rather interesting.
Before I get going with today's lecture,
though, I would like to do something else,
which I'm going to be doing a little bit
more regularly as we go along. As you know,
I'm critiquing modern mathematics here; I'm
questioning the foundations of analysis.
My claim is that the modern foundations of
analysis don't really work, and so I think
it's useful to occasionally present you with
some evidence of that from the literature.
Today, what I'm going to do is just very quickly
have a look at a lovely book. Periodically,
I'm going to show you some books,
and we're going to talk about them,
especially in relation to foundational aspects.
I should say that all the books I'm going to
show you are books that I value highly. I'm not
going to bring any books and show you them unless
I already respect and value them as important
contributions. So, even though I may be saying
some negative things about the books I'm showing
you, I still think quite highly of them overall.
The book I'm showing you today is this one
here; it's called Selected Papers on Calculus.
It's already about 50 years old, and it's by the
Mathematical Association of America. It's a very
interesting compilation of many articles that
have appeared over the years in the American
Mathematical Monthly, which is one of the most
prestigious and widely read of all popular
mathematics journals. All these articles have to
do with calculus in one way or another. There are
probably about 150 different articles, many very
nice ones with a lot of interesting material.
What I want to point out to you is that,
scanning the articles here—which range from
the history of calculus to pedagogy,
talking about functions, continuity,
differentiation, derivatives, polynomials,
integration techniques, summation, sequences,
and special numbers like pi and e—despite
the many articles found in this book,
very few of them actually deal with foundational
questions. The pure foundational questions of how
one sets up analysis, such as the critical
issues of how we define what a function is,
the definitions of the trigonometric functions,
the exponential function, the log function,
or the definitions of the various constants
like pi and e, and more generally, how one
sets up the real numbers to begin with—these
all-important issues, these foundational problems,
and others having to do with the nature of the
derivative and the definition of the integral,
are basically all finessed in this book,
as they are in many other treatments.
There is simply this blanket assumption that all
those issues are more or less bedded down and not
even worth raising and examining. So, it's like a
survey of building or construction which doesn't
have any chapters on how to lay the foundations of
a house. There's something askew here, especially
considering the very significant foundational
problems that beset modern analysis in the
early part of the last century. There was a lot of
debate 100 years ago about how to set up analysis,
about what continuity meant, what integration
meant, and various other things—in particular,
the real numbers. How does one set them up?
These questions have now been largely relegated
to ancient history, and there's a very convenient
assumption by the academy to pretend that all such
problems are nonexistent. There's a big elephant
sitting in the corner of the room, and as long as
we don't pay any attention to it and it doesn't
pay any attention to us, everything will be fine.
So, in subsequent videos, I'm going
to show you some other textbooks,
and we're going to have a closer look at
how modern mathematics actually addresses
these issues that I'm discussing in this series.
Okay, so today we're going to talk
about rational polynomial sequences,
or maybe rational polyon sequences for short.
I'm going to follow a, by now, hopefully familiar
framework. We started off with this course talking
about natural numbers, integers, fractions,
and working our way to rational numbers. Natural
numbers like this: integers were defined in terms
of pairs of natural numbers—so, 2 less 3, that
was the way we introduced what we now call minus
one. We talked about fractions like 1/7, also
built from natural numbers, and then sort of
putting these two things together—integers over
integers making rational numbers—and they are
the sort of prime objects for doing arithmetic
in everyday life, the rational number field.
Then, later, when we started introducing algebra,
we went up a level of sophistication and started
talking about polynomials, or as we preferred,
poly numbers. Analogous to this, we had a sort
of compatible structure of natural number poly
numbers, integral poly numbers, fractional poly
numbers, and rational poly numbers. Here's
a typical natural polynomial, and then
taking differences of them yields integral poly
numbers. That's one way of introducing integral
poly numbers. Another way is just to consider poly
numbers with integer coefficients, which amounts
to roughly the same thing. We can take ratios
of them to create fractional poly numbers,
and if we do that with integer poly numbers,
then we get the field of rational poly numbers,
which is second in importance in mathematics
only to the field of rational numbers.
So, rational numbers and rational poly
numbers—these are fields that support
our four fundamental operations: addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division,
with just a little bit of a problem—we're
not allowed to divide by zero. Otherwise,
there's a kind of uniformity and a completeness
in these kinds of arithmetic domains.
Okay, so having understood this framework,
we're going to now go up a level to considering
sequences, or on sequences, built up from
the basic, similar framework. We're mostly
interested today in these rational poly numbers
and extending them to on sequences. So, let's have
a reminder of what these objects are like and how
we do arithmetic with rational poly numbers. Now,
in modern mathematics, these objects are
often called rational functions, which is
unfortunate terminology. The term "rational
poly numbers" or "rational polynomials" is,
I think, superior notation and more
properly captures what we're doing.
So, I remind you that a rational poly number
is a formal ratio of two integral poly numbers,
and there is an important notion of
equality: that P/Q = R/S precisely
when PS = RQ. These four are all integral
poly numbers, so you can think of them as
polynomials with coefficients which
are integers—polynomials in alpha.
For example, here is a rational polynomial, and
we'll write the fraction not with a slant like
this but rather with a horizontal bar because it's
just easier to write. So, this one here, 1 - Alpha
over 2 + Alpha squared, that's the same as Alpha -
Alpha squared over 2 Alpha + Alpha cubed. And why
is that? It's because if you multiply 1 - Alpha
by this, it's the same as what you get when you
multiply this by Alpha - Alpha squared. And we can
see that in another way by just realizing that to
go from here to here, we've multiplied the top and
the bottom by the same poly number, namely Alpha.
So, to go from here to here, we've multiplied by
Alpha; to go from here to here, we've multiplied
by Alpha. That has the effect of making sure
that this kind of equality is maintained. So,
these two rational poly numbers may look
different, but they are actually officially
exactly the same objects for us. It's going to be
a basic but important point in today's lecture.
Okay, and we can do arithmetic with these things.
So, for example, if we want to add this rational
poly number and this one, well, then what we do
is we take this times this plus this times this,
all over this times this, just exactly
the same way we add fractions. Of course,
there's simplification here necessary to
get it in standard form, top and bottom. So,
of course, arithmetic with fractions,
with ordinary rational numbers,
is a necessary preliminary to doing algebra with
these rational poly numbers. We can multiply two
of them, in which case we just multiply the
numerators and multiply the denominators,
and we can also divide one by the other,
which amounts to multiplying this one by
the reciprocal of this one—what you get when
you interchange the numerator and denominator.
So, I hope we're all comfortable with
the arithmetic or the algebra of rational
poly numbers. And let's just make sure that
we're all on the same level here—that we all
appreciate that these rational poly numbers are
not functions. Okay, so they are not functions,
first of all, because we have not got a
comprehensive definition of what a function
is—that's actually a very problematic issue. For
example, when we write down something like this,
T = 4 - Alpha + Alpha^5 + 7 Alpha squared, that
is not a function. It is simply an expression
that we write down in terms of Alphas. So, the
expression itself lives above any particular
interpretation of it. Someone can come along and
say, "Oh, well, that looks like a function from
the rational numbers to the rational numbers,"
and someone else can come along and say, "Oh no,
that looks like a sequence—we input a natural
number and get out a rational number." Someone
else might say, "No, no, that's a function from
the complex numbers to the complex numbers." There
might be lots of other possible interpretations
of this, but for us, the object itself is just
the expression. We do not need to specify a
particular interpretation of the expression.
Okay, so earlier in this series, I gave
an entire lecture on this issue of the
difference between object-oriented
mathematics and expression-oriented
mathematics, and you will know that I encourage an
expression-oriented approach to mathematical work.
Okay, there's another important notion that we
need to consider, and that's the evaluation of
rational poly numbers. So, for example, if we
stick with this one here—this T, it's a rational
poly number—what is T of 1? Well, T of 1 is what
you get when you replace the alpha with the number
1. So, 4 - 1 + 1/5 is 1 over 5 + 7 * 1 squared,
for a total of 4 over 12, which is a rational
number, also equal to 1/3. Another example: we
could also plug in an integer, say minus 2, put
Alpha equal to -2. We get 4 + 2 + (-2)^5, which
is -32, over 5 + 7 * 4, 28, giving us -26 over 33.
So, in general, the rule is that if we have
a rational polynomial which is A over B,
where A and B are integral poly numbers, and
if, say, K is an integer, then P of K is,
by definition, the rational number A of K over B
of K. So, we have a well-defined notion of what it
means to evaluate a poly number at an integer, and
we're evaluating two poly numbers and taking the
corresponding rational number we get. So, we can
evaluate rational poly numbers at, say, integers.
So, now that we're all happy with rational poly
numbers, let's use them to extend our notion of
on sequences to consider more general infinite
sequences. We're replacing the term "infinite
sequences" with "on sequences," short for "ongoing
sequences." So, the idea is we're going to start
with a rational poly number, and we're going
to generate a sequence from it. We'll call
that a rational polyon sequence, and here's our
notation. It's already familiar by now, I hope:
left square bracket, the actual rational poly
number, and then a right-pointed bracket. An
alternate notation is we're going to replace the
alpha in P with the letter n. N is our favorite
number for sequences, and that expression will
also indicate to us that we have a sequence here.
And the crucial thing about a sequence, or an on
sequence, is that we can pick out the K element,
where K is usually a natural number for us—so 1,
2, 3, 4, and so on. And the definition is that
if we take this rational poly number P and then
generate this on sequence, then the K element
in that on sequence is, by definition, P of K.
Now, that's in general a rational number, not an
integer—so K is an integer, but what's on this
side here will typically be a rational number.
So, let us look at an example. Here
is our rational poly number P: it is
1 + Alpha - Alpha squared over 2 + Alpha cubed.
So, one integral polynomial in the numerator,
another integral polynomial in the denominator.
Then what is the corresponding on sequence? We
can write it as the sequence P, or to be more
explicit, we can write it this way, with this
expression put in here, the alphas replaced with
n's. So, the sequence 1 + n - n^2 over 2 + n^3.
Okay, and what is this sequence?
It's the sequence that you get
by starting to calculate the values of
this thing—first when n is equal to one,
then when n is equal to two, then when n is
equal to three, and so on. So, for example,
when n is equal to one, we get 1 + 1 - 1^2—that's
a total of one on the top—over 2 + 1^3,
that's 3. If n is equal to 2, we would have 1 +
2 - 4, that's minus 1 altogether, over 2 + 2^3,
which is 10. So that should be -1/10. And the next
one, let's just check that: if n is equal to 3,
1 + 3 - 9, that's 4 - 9, that's -5, over 2
+ 3^3, that's 2 + 27, that is in fact 29.
Alright, so if our arithmetic is good, we
can carry on generating more and more terms,
and of course the thing doesn't
necessarily stop—it sort of
keeps on going. Depending on how much
patience and computing power we have,
we can keep on generating more and
more terms in this ongoing sequence.
So, now we've extended our notion of infinite
sequences, or on sequences, in an important way.
We've gone from constant on sequences to poly
number on sequences, and now to rational poly
number on sequences. So, these are now much more
general kinds of on sequences, and they're very
important for us in calculus, as we'll see. These
are very much sort of workhorses of calculus.
So, it all seems very good, but in fact there is
a big logical problem. What I've told you in the
last few slides is logically weak. There is
a key problem that I have sloughed over and
not mentioned, and I wonder how many of you have
caught on to what that is. So, it's now a great
exercise to go over these few pages and to look
very carefully at what I've done and ask yourself,
okay, what is the problem here? There's
a logical problem. So, you might want to
stop the video and go over these issues, have a
look, spend perhaps some days thinking about it.
Okay, there's a logical problem, and you want
to find out what it is. It's not particularly
subtle—it's pretty straightforward, and once
you see it, it's kind of obvious, right? So,
please have a look and have a think about what is
the logical problem that I've been ignoring here.
So, I hope you found what that logical
problem is yourselves. Okay, and it comes
down to a very common source of difficulty
in mathematics—elementary but common—which is
that division by zero is illegal. That's the one
operation with rational numbers that we are not
allowed to do. And unfortunately, we have built
in the possibility of division by zero so far
in our treatment of these rational poly number
on sequences. For example, suppose that we had
looked at the rational poly number Alpha over 2
- Alpha. This is a rational poly number because
it's an integral poly number over another integral
poly number. Okay, here's the associated rational
polyon sequence: n over 2 - n. What's the sequence
associated with it? Well, we just start generating
values—when n is 1, we get 1 over 2 - 1, that's
1 over 1. When n is 2, we get 2 over 2 - 2, that
unfortunately is 2 over 0. When n is 3, we get 3
over 2 - 3, that's 3 over -1. My arithmetic is not
very good today. There we go. And we could keep
on going, and there would be no more problems.
However, there's no escaping the
fact that when n is equal to 2,
we have forced ourselves to make an
illegal operation—2 over 0. All bets are
off. This object collapses as a logically
coherent thing. It just does not work.
Let's look at another example, slightly
more complicated. Here we have a rational
poly number Q: 1 over 3 - 4 Alpha - 2
Alpha squared + Alpha cubed. Alright,
so we can generate values. When you plug in Alpha
= 1, then you get 3 - 4 - 2 + 1, that's 4 - 6,
that'd be minus 2, so we get -1/2. When n is 2,
hopefully it'll be minus 1/5. And what happens
when n is equal to 3? Well, it's not so obvious
here, but let's have a look: 3 - 12, and then
this will be -18 + 27. So altogether, 3 + 27,
that's 30, and -2 - 18, that's -30. We're going
to get zero in the denominator again. This just
does not work. This is not a legitimate object.
So that's certainly a problem, but there's another
kind of problem also—a more subtle kind of problem
but just as important. Consider the following
example, which seems to be quite okay: the example
R = Alpha over 1 + Alpha. The associated
on sequence n over 1 + n. This is clearly
unsurprising. This same poly number R is also
equal to this poly number—these are exactly the
same poly numbers. The numerator here is obtained
from this one by multiplying by 1 - Alpha. The
denominator here is obtained from this one by
multiplying by 1 - Alpha. Since we're multiplying
by the same things top and bottom, there's
no question that this object and this object
are exactly the same. We've agreed that they're
exactly the same poly numbers, exactly the same
rational poly numbers. The associated on sequence
we ought to write like this: n - n^2 over 1 - n^2.
So, what is the associated sequence? Well, when
we evaluate this thing when n is equal to 1,
the rule is to plug n = 1 into the numerator. We
get 0. Plug n into the denominator, we get 1 - 1,
another 0. We're getting 0 over 0, which is also
undefined. Subsequent values are okay—2/3, 3/4,
and so on. So, these two sequences
agree perfectly, except at the first
term. There's a difference: this one was
well-defined, this one was not well-defined,
yet we said that these were actually going
to be the same rational poly numbers.
So, we have a problem here: the evaluation of a
rational poly number is not well defined. We were
too hasty, a little bit too simple-minded,
in assigning a meaning to the evaluation
of a rational poly number. So, we have to go
back and rethink that important definition.
Let's have a closer look at one
of the offending examples. Here,
these two expressions as rational poly numbers
are equal. This is the example we had on the
last sheet—this one just obtained from this one by
multiplying the top and bottom by 1 - Alpha. Now,
these two expressions agree at all
rational values except at 1. So,
when you take any rational value and plug it
into both of these things, you're going to
get the same expression unless R is equal to 1.
When R is equal to 1, this will evaluate to 1/2,
but this will evaluate to 0/0. The reason is that
the polynomial that we've multiplied this one by
to get this, which is 1 - Alpha over 1 - Alpha,
evaluates to 1 for every rational value except
r = 1. In other words, this has the value 1 if
you replace Alpha with any number whatsoever—so
obviously except when you replace Alpha with 1,
in which case you get 0/0, which is undefined.
So, I think we can see the reason why things
are going wrong. These two expressions are
agreeing completely, except when R just has
this particular value of 1 because of the
sort of artificial 0/0 that multiplying
by this term introduced. In particular,
if R is a rational number which is close to
1, close to 1 but not actually equal to 1,
like perhaps 0.998 or 1.3, then we know
that replacing this with r gives the same
value—these things are actually equal. So, the two
expressions agree even for R very close to 1; it's
just that exactly at 1 they happen to disagree
because of the 0/0 that's being introduced there.
Alright, so let's go back to this issue of
evaluating a rational poly number, and let's be
a little bit more careful about this definition.
We'll suppose that P equals A/B, where A and B are
integral poly numbers, and we'll suppose that
K is an integer—or actually, for sequences,
just a natural number will do. The idea is we
want to evaluate P at this natural number K. Okay,
we're going to do two things: we're going to look
at the numerator A, and we're going to write it
by factoring out Alpha - K. Perhaps Alpha - K is
a factor of this polynomial—this is an integral
polynomial, so maybe it has Alpha - K as a factor,
maybe it has Alpha - K squared as a factor, or
Alpha - K cubed. We're going to factor out as many
of these Alpha - K's as we can and write A as a
product of some other sort of quotient polynomial,
Alpha tilde, say, times this term Alpha - K to
the power of n. The crucial thing about this is
that it does not have Alpha - K as a factor. So,
by Descartes' factor theorem, if it doesn't have
Alpha - K as a factor, it means that when we
evaluate it at K, we're not getting zero. Now, it
might be that this n is actually zero, so it might
be that A doesn't have any factors of Alpha - K.
That's okay, so we include that possibility, where
n is zero. We do the same thing for B: we write
it as some polynomial B hat times some power Alpha
- K to the power of m, say, where again, this
polynomial B hat has the property that when you
evaluate it at K, you don't get zero. So here, n
and m are natural numbers augmented with zero, so
we're including all natural numbers—1, 2, 3, and
also the possibility that the exponents are zero.
So, this is a preliminary to defining
what P of K is. Having done this,
we are now in a position to define P of
K, and here's the definition. It might
look a little bit surprising; there's some new
things involved here. Alright, first of all,
there are three different cases depending on
the relationship between these numbers n and m:
If n is bigger than m—in other words,
if there are more factors of Alpha - K
in the numerator than there are in the
denominator—then we define P of K to be zero.
If they're exactly equal, if there's the same
number of Alpha - K's in the numerator and in the
denominator, then we define P of K to be Alpha hat
of K over B hat of K. In other words, we just look
at this thing over this thing—essentially, we're
canceling out the Alpha - K to the power of n
and the Alpha - K to the power of m, top
and bottom, because the exponents are the
same in this case. The crucial thing is these
are nonzero numbers, because by assumption,
this is nonzero, and this is also nonzero, so
this rational number actually does make sense.
But there's a third case, the case
when n is less than m—in other words,
where there are more factors of Alpha - K in the
denominator than in the numerator. In that case,
we are going to define P of K to be infinity.
Wait a minute, what does that mean? Well,
this sideways eight is a new symbol that we're
introducing. It's just a new symbol. Its name
is rather grandiosely "infinity"—that's what
we're going to call this sideways eight. You
can just think of it as something that
we draw on the paper; it looks pretty,
it's like a lemniscate. And we're going to agree
that if this exponent is less than this exponent,
then P of K is infinity. Admittedly, this is
not a rational number—right? It's definitely
not a rational number; it's a new expression
that is outside our current number system.
And it's just one of the realities
of mathematics that at some point,
it's necessary to think about extending
our number system to include a number
that plays the role—or an object that plays the
role—of infinity. That's what we're doing now.
So, we're going to talk more about this—this is
a very interesting development. But basically,
we have no choice; we have to do this
if we want to have a sort of consistent
understanding of the sequences
generated by rational poly numbers.
Okay, so this is a very important
definition. It probably requires a
few hours of thinking about—right? Write
out this definition, stare at it. Now,
let's have a look at some examples—always
the best way to understand and to start to
appreciate what the definition actually means.
Okay, without examples, this is all sterile.
Alright, so let's look at an example. Here is
the polynomial P = Alpha - Alpha squared over
1 - Alpha squared. Let's think about evaluating
it at the number one. It's obviously going to
be problematic because in the numerator, we have
1 - 1, which is zero, and in the denominator, we
also have 1 - 1, which is zero. So, what we have
to do is factor the numerator and the denominator,
and we're particularly interested in factors of
the form Alpha - 1. Okay, in this case, it's a
little bit easier if we use 1 - Alpha, because
the arithmetic is just a little bit easier. So,
I'm going to factor a 1 - Alpha out there and a
1 - Alpha out there. 1 - Alpha over 1 - Alpha,
it's the same as Alpha - 1 over Alpha - 1.
Alright, so having done that, we see that this
thing really is the same as Alpha over 1 + Alpha.
So, 1 - Alpha appears with an exponent of one in
the numerator and also one in the denominator.
That's that middle case. The middle case means
that we basically factor these things out, we
disregard them, and just consider the rest,
which is Alpha over 1 + Alpha, and plug 1
into that. So, this is the A hat, and this is
the B hat in the former notation. So, we just
plug Alpha = 1 here and here to get 1 over 2.
And okay, we can think about also roughly a kind
of a limit that, if we look at this expression
here or we look at this expression here, if R is
a number, a rational number, that's approaching 1,
then the value of this thing is going to be
the same thing as the value of this thing,
as long as R is not equal to 1. And then, as
the value approaches 1, well, this is going
to approach 1/2. So, another way of thinking
about what we're doing here is we're really
sort of thinking about the limit as R approaches
1 of P of R. But we haven't defined limits yet,
so this is just a rather informal observation
that what we're doing here is a kind of an
algebraic equivalent of taking a limit, for
those of you who have had some calculus before.
Alright, so now we're in a position to write down
the on sequence for this rational polyon sequence.
The value at 1 is not 0/0—the value at 1 is 1/2,
as we've just computed. The value at 2 is 2/3,
then at 3, 3/4, then 4/5, and so on. So, it
gives us a completely legitimate on sequence,
even though at first glance you might say
this is undefined when n is equal to 1.
So, those of you who are used to calculus and
treating functions in calculus, there's some
adjustment to be made here. We are not thinking
about this thing as primarily a function—that is
not what it is. It's a rational poly number,
and as a rational poly number, this thing and
this thing are exactly equal. In calculus, if you
were thinking of these as functions in calculus,
you would have to say that as functions,
these were almost equal, but not quite equal,
because their values at 1 were not the same.
We are not adopting that point of view. These
are exactly the same objects for us, and so
the on sequences that they generate have to
be exactly the same. And so, we are forced
to introduce our evaluation as we've done to
talk consistently about the on sequence
associated with a rational poly number.
Let's look at another example, a
bit more complicated. Here we have
P = 6 - 5 Alpha + Alpha squared over -6 + 20
Alpha - 8 Alpha squared + Alpha cubed. So,
if you set Alpha equal to 1 in here, it's not
too hard to see you're going to get 2 over -3,
or -2/3. If you plug 2 in, well, you're going
to get 6 - 10 + 4, that's zero on the top,
and in the bottom here, you're going to get -6
+ 20 - 32 + 8, which is also zero. And well,
these other values are made a little bit simpler
by realizing that the polynomials that are
involved here can be factored. So, the numerator
can be factored as Alpha - 3 times Alpha - 2,
and this denominator can be factored as Alpha - 4
times Alpha - 2 squared. So, that makes it clear
what's going to happen when we plug in Alpha =
2: we're going to get 0/0 because of these terms
here, at least when we have the naive approach.
But now, with our more sophisticated notion of
evaluation, we know that that's not quite what
we're going to get. To evaluate this thing at 2,
what we need to do is we need to look at these
factors of Alpha - 2 that are appearing in the
numerator and denominator, and notice that
the exponent in the denominator is bigger
than the exponent in the numerator—there's more
Alpha - 2's in the denominator than there is in
the numerator. That means that our definition
is that P of 2 is our new symbol, infinity.
How about evaluating it at 3? Well, this form of
it makes it kind of obvious that the numerator
is going to be zero, and the denominator is
going to be nonzero, so we're going to get
zero as the quotient. And when Alpha is equal to
4, or when n is equal to 4, we get a zero in the
denominator here and no Alpha - 4 term in the
numerator. So again, that's the third case—we
must put in infinity. Then at 5, we're out of the
woods—then we have 5 - 3, which is 2 times 5 - 2,
which is 3, over 5 - 4, which is 1, times 5 - 2,
that's 3 squared. So that'll be 6/9, which is 2/3.
So, the associated on sequence to this
poly number is -2/3, and then infinity,
and then zero, and then another
infinity, and then 2/3, and then,
well, we could evaluate some more just
by substituting in here and evaluating.
So, we necessarily get on sequences whose
entries are not just rational numbers, but
also involve this new object—maybe we shouldn't
call it a number yet; it's a new expression,
this sideways 8, which we're calling infinity,
rather grandiosely. Probably it would be better
if we called it something else, but there's no way
to change the established convention with regard
to this symbol. We have to call it infinity,
and it's actually not such a bad idea anyway,
as we'll now see by actually looking at
a picture of these rational poly numbers.
So, we've spent a little bit of time graphing
poly numbers or polynomials. The idea with
rational poly numbers is much the same, except
that it's a little bit more complicated,
and we have to be prepared to use rational
numbers. Here's our first example of the rational
polynomial Alpha - Alpha squared over 1 - Alpha
squared, and I'm writing it here sort of more in
calculus style with an x and a y, reflecting
our x and y graphs that we like to draw.
So, how do we come up with a plot like this? Well,
it's exactly the same kind of thing that you do
before: you plug in various values of x, say x =
2, that would give us 2 - 4, that'd be minus 2,
over 1 - 4, that'd be minus 3. So, -2 over -3,
that'd be 2/3. So, I have to go up to the 2/3
level, and I would mark a point there. So, if
you calculate lots of points and then you just
connect them with little lines, then you get this
graph that looks partially like this. Of course,
this is just part of the picture; there's more
outside, and of course, as we become more and
more refined, this is just my very rough
drawing of this thing, not very accurate.
The associated on sequence is just obtained
when we restrict ourselves to the values 1,
2, 3, and 4, and so on. So,
the value at 1 is a half,
the value at 2 is 2/3, the
value at 3 is 3/4, and so on.
There's a few things to notice about this graph,
of course. There's something special happening at
x = -1 and at x = 1, because the denominator is
zero at both of those. The value at x = 1 turns
out to be sort of an optical illusion because
of the common factor of 1 - x in the numerator
and denominator. But at x = -1, we have a
more crucial kind of singularity here. The
graph really does kind of go further and further
down as we approach minus one from the right,
and here, as we approach minus one from
the left, it goes up and up and up. So,
it would be quite correct to say that the
value of this thing at minus one is infinity.
What about this one here? That was our second
example: x - 3 times x - 2 over x - 4 times x - 2
squared. Well, that's a little bit more
complicated. There's now a singularity at 2 and 4,
corresponding to the two factors x - 4 and x -
2 in the denominator. The graph looks something
like this, and this goes off to zero. So, we're
going to talk more about graphs of rational poly
numbers like this. I don't expect you to be able
to graph these so easily on your own—we'll talk a
little bit more about these. These are going
to play a very important role in calculus;
these are very, very important objects.
This is just an introduction to them.
And here's the sequence that we get by looking
at the values at 1, at 2, at 3, at 4, and 5,
and so on. At 1, we decided we had -2/3. At 2, we
had infinity—that was our sideways eight. At 3,
we have zero—you can see it going through
zero there. At 4, you can see again the
infinite aspect of it. At 5, it becomes 2/3,
and then it decreases from that on toward zero.
So, these infinities that are appearing
here, of course, are very interesting,
and they're reflecting the fact that the graphs of
these functions are doing something interesting at
these values—at 2 and 4 here, and at minus 1
here. The limit of the values really is—well,
it's going sort of down, down, down, sort
of towards minus infinity, you might say.
And when we approach 2 from this side, it's
going up, up, up towards plus infinity. Maybe
even in some sense, the values kind of agree
that maybe the infinite in this direction
and the infinite in that direction somehow
meet—that's what the notation is suggesting.
Okay, so we've opened up a new can of worms here.
We've opened up the possibility of extending our
number system to include infinity. And you
may know that I don't like infinite sets,
okay, and I'm very modest about things like
this. So, we are not proposing that we are
now at the level of gods, okay, that we are
now somehow superior to what we were yesterday
because we've introduced this symbol. No, it's
just a symbol—it's an expression that we write
down on the paper, which has a very specific and
well-defined and coherent mathematical meaning.
Next time, we're going to talk a little bit
more about the possible arithmetic that we
might get by extending our favorite rational
number system to include this new expression,
infinity. Is it possible? Does it work? It's
a favorite subject of amateur mathematicians,
so we're going to go down a little
bit of that track next time. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger—thanks for listening.
[Music]